Advertise your product or brand here
contact www.OpenSubtitles.org today
[ On September 3rd 1973 ]
[ at 6:28pm and 32 seconds, ]
[ a bluebottle fly capable ]
[ of 14,670 wing beats a minute... ]
[ ...landed on Rue St Vincent, Montmartre. ]
[ At the same moment, ]
[ on a restaurant terrace nearby, ]
[ the wind magically made two glasses ]
[ dance unseen on a tablecloth. ]
[ Meanwhile, in a 5th-floor flat, ]
[ 28 Avenue Trudaine, Paris 9, ]
[ returning from his best friend's funeral, ]
[ Eugène Colère erased his name... ]
[ ...from his address book. ]
[ At the same moment, ]
[ a sperm with one X chromosome, ]
[ belonging to Raphaël Poulain, ]
[ made a dash for an egg
in his wife Amandine. ]
[ Nine months later, ]
[ Amélie Poulain was born. ]
[The Fabulous Life Of Amélie Poulain]
[ Her father, an ex-army doctor, ]
[ works at a spa in Enghien-Les-Bains. ]
[TIGHT LIPS = HARD HEART]
[ Raphaël Poulain dislikes: ]
[ Peeing next to someone
else. He also dislikes: ]
[ Catching scornful glances at his sandals. ]
[ Clingy wet swimming trunks. ]
[ Raphaël Poulain likes: ]
[ Peeling off large strips of wallpaper. ]
[ Lining up all his shoes and polishing them. ]
[ Emptying his tool box, ]
[ cleaning it out, ]
[ and putting everything back. ]
[ Amélie's mother, Amandine, ]
[ a schoolmistress from Gueugnon, ]
[ has always had shaky nerves. ]
[FACIAL TWITCH = WEAK NERVES]
[ Amandine Poulain dislikes: ]
[ Getting puckered fingers in the bath. ]
[ When someone she doesn't like... ]
[ ...brushes against her hand. ]
[ Pillow marks on her cheek in the morning. ]
[ Amandine Poulain likes: ]
[ Figure skaters' costumes on TV. ]
[ Polishing the parquet with slippers. ]
[ Emptying her handbag, ]
[ cleaning it out, ]
[ and putting everything back. ]
[ Amélie is six. ]
[ Like all little girls, ]
[ she'd like to be hugged by her daddy. ]
[ But he never touches her, ]
[ except for a monthly checkup. ]
[ The thrill of this rare contact... ]
[ ...makes her heart beat like a drum. ]
[ As a result, ]
[ he thinks she has a heart defect. ]
[ Declared unfit for school, ]
[ Amélie is taught by her mother. ]
Four...
...hens...
...brood...
...here...
...henceforth.
Four hens brood...
Very good.
...hens fourth.
- No.
[ Deprived of playmates, ]
[ tossed about ]
[ between a neurotic and an iceberg, ]
[ Amélie retreats into her imagination. ]
[ In this world, LPs are made like pancakes. ]
[ The neighbour's comatose wife... ]
[ ...has chosen to get all
her life's sleep in one go. ]
After this, I can stay awake day and night.
[ Amélie has one friend, Blubber. ]
[ Alas, the home environment ]
[ has made Blubber suicidal. ]
[ Blubber's suicide attempts ]
[ destroy Mother's nerves. ]
[ A decision is made. ]
Enough.
[ To comfort Amélie, her mother... ]
[ ...gives her a second-hand
Instamatic camera. ]
Little girl. Look what you did.
[ A neighbour fools her into thinking ]
[ her camera causes accidents. ]
[ Because she'd been taking pictures ]
[ all afternoon, Amélie is petrified. ]
[ She stares at the TV, racked by the guilt... ]
[ ...of causing a huge fire, ]
[ two derailments... ]
[ ...and a jumbo jet crash. ]
[ A few days later, ]
[ realising she'd been had, ]
[ Amélie gets her revenge. ]
What...?
[ One day tragedy strikes. ]
[ Amandine takes Amélie to Notre Dame... ]
[ ...to light a candle and
pray for a baby brother. ]
[ Three minutes later, heaven sends, ]
[ alas, not a baby boy, but Marguerite, ]
[ a tourist from Quebec, ]
[ bent on ending her life. ]
[ Amandine Poulain is killed instantly. ]
[ After her mother's death, ]
[ Amélie lives alone with her father. ]
[ His unsociable tendencies increase. ]
[ He's obsessed with building
a miniature shrine... ]
[ ...to house his wife's ashes. ]
[ Days, months and years go by. ]
[ In such a dead world, ]
[ Amélie prefers to dream ]
[ until she's old enough to leave home. ]
[ Five years later, ]
[ she's a waitress in Montmartre... ]
[ ...at The Two Windmills. ]
[ It is August 29th. ]
[ In 48 hours, her life will change for ever. ]
[ But she doesn't know it yet. ]
[ She lives quietly among her colleagues ]
[ and the café's regulars. ]
[ That's Suzanne, the owner. ]
[ She limps a little but
she's never spilt a drink. ]
[ When she was younger,
she was a circus rider. ]
[ She likes athletes who
cry with disappointment. ]
[ She dislikes seeing men humiliated ]
[ in front of their kids in her café. ]
[ Georgette is the tobacconist. ]
[ She's a hypochondriac. ]
[ Migraines one day, sciatica the next. ]
[ She hates the words... ]
[ 'fruit of thy womb'. ]
[ Gina works with Amélie. ]
[ Her grandmother was a healer. ]
[ She likes cracking bones. ]
[ She's bringing a kir to
Hipolito, a failed writer. ]
[ He likes seeing bullfighters gored on TV. ]
[ Scowling at them is Joseph, ]
[ Gina's rejected lover. ]
[ He's always jealously spying on her. ]
[ All he likes... ]
[ ...is popping bubble wrap. ]
[ And here's Philomène, an air hostess. ]
[ Amélie looks after her cat Rodrigue ]
[ when she's away. Philomène likes... ]
[ ...the sound of the cat's bowl on the tiles. ]
[ Rodrigue likes overhearing
children's stories. ]
No, thanks, ma'am. I
never work on Sundays.
[ At weekends, Amélie often takes a train ]
[ from the Gare du Nord to see her father. ]
Why don't you use your retirement to...?
- To do what?
Travel. You've never been away.
When we were young,
your mother and I longed to travel.
But we couldn't.
Because of your heart.
- Yes. I know.
So now...
Now...
[ Some Friday evenings, ]
[ Amélie goes to the cinema. ]
I like turning round
and looking at people's faces in the dark.
I like noticing details
that no-one else ever sees.
But I hate it in old American movies
when drivers don't watch the road.
[ Amélie doesn't have a boyfriend. ]
[ She tried once or twice, ]
[ but the results were a let-down. ]
[ Instead, she cultivates a taste ]
[ for small pleasures. ]
[ Plunging her hand deep
into a sack of grain. ]
[ Cracking crème brûlée... ]
[ ...with a teaspoon. ]
[ And skimming stones on
the Canal St Martin. ]
[ They call him the Glass Man. ]
[ He was born with bones
as brittle as crystal. ]
[ All his furniture is padded. ]
[ A handshake would be enough ]
[ to crush his fingers. ]
[ He's stayed indoors for 20 years. ]
[ Time has changed nothing. ]
[ Amélie still takes refuge in solitude. ]
[ She amuses herself with silly questions ]
[ about the world below, ]
[ such as: 'How many couples ]
[ are having an orgasm now?' ]
Fifteen.
[ Finally, on the night of August 30th 1997. ]
[ comes the event ]
[ that will change her life for ever. ]
[ Lady Di, Princess of Wales, ]
[ died in a car crash in Paris last night... ]
[ ...with her companion Dodi Al Fayed... ]
[ Only the first man ]
[ to discover Tutankhamen's tomb... ]
[ ...would understand how she felt... ]
[ ...on finding this treasure... ]
[ ...hidden by a little boy 40 years ago. ]
[ On August 31st at 4am, ]
[ Amélie has a dazzling idea. ]
[ Wherever he was, ]
[ she would find the box's owner... ]
[ ...and give him back his treasure. ]
[ If he was touched, ]
[ she'd become a regular do-gooder. ]
[ If not, too bad. ]
The girl from the 5th floor.
We don't see much of you.
Would you know of a boy
who lived in my flat in the '50s?
A boy? Come and have a glass of port.
No, thanks.
- Come in. Close the door.
Boys? I've known so many.
They're cute until they discover
snowballs and chestnuts.
I've known so many boys.
When did you come here?
- In '64.
You'll have heard the story.
No, I don't think so.
I'm amazed. Sit down.
My husband worked for
Ladybird Insurance.
It's no secret that he
slept with his secretary.
They used every hotel around.
Not the grotty ones, either.
The bimbo liked spreading her legs,
but only on satin.
So my husband swiped from the till.
A little at first, then 50 million.
Off they flew to South America.
Drink up.
On January 20th 1970,
my doorbell rang.
'Your husband's been killed
in a car crash in South America.'
My life stopped there.
And Black Lion died of heartbreak.
Poor creature.
See how lovingly...
...he still stares at his master?
One day
I'll read you his letters.
No, don't go.
You can spare five minutes.
He wrote this...
...from the barracks.
'Darling Mado.' That's me.
I'm called Madeleine.
'I can't sleep, can't eat,
knowing that my only reason to live
is far away in Paris.
I won't see her until a fortnight on Friday,
when my sweet little weasel
appears at the station...
...in her strappy blue dress.'
In brackets: 'The one you think
is too transparent.'
Has anyone ever written to you like that?
No. I'm nobody's little weasel.
My name's Madeleine Wells.
Madeleine, like Mary Magdalene.
She wept, right? And Wells as in water.
Talk about being born to cry.
About your question...
Ask Collignon, the grocer.
He's lived here all his life.
Hello, Amélie-mellow.
A fig and three hazelnuts, as usual?
Who lived in my flat in the '50s?
What was their name?
- You've got me there, dear.
In 1950, I was two.
The mental age of this cretin.
[ The 'cretin' is Lucien. ]
[ He's no genius, but Amélie likes him. ]
[ She likes the way... ]
[ ...he handles each endive
like a precious object... ]
[ ...to be treated with care. ]
[ It's his way of showing... ]
[ ...his love of good work. ]
Look at him.
Like he's nursing a baby bird
that's fallen out of its nest.
Don't ask him for currants.
You'd be here till Monday.
Get moving, spastic.
She hasn't got all day.
Here.
Go and see my mother.
She has the memory of an elephant.
Elephant Mum.
Thank you.
Bredoteau.
Sorry?
It's the name you're after.
But if it's me that says so,
it won't count. I'm senile.
Ignore him. He's senile.
See what he's done to my laurel?
His old job was punching métro tickets.
For three months now,
he's got up every night to punch holes...
...in my laurels.
- I'd have preferred lilacs. Such is life.
We all need a way to relax.
- I skim stones.
You do?
- I'll find it. Don't worry.
I file everything.
- Like what?
Your son's nearly 50
and I'm still doing his book-keeping.
You were still squeezing
his toothpaste at 15,
so it follows.
Right. Camus...
...2nd floor on the right. Brossard...
Brossard was on staircase B.
Got it.
Bredoteau, 5th floor on the right.
They were from the Pas de Calais.
Bredoteau. What more can I say?
[ Groping under the photo booth ]
[ is Nino Quincampoix. ]
[ When Amélie lacked playmates, ]
[ Nino had too many. ]
[ Five miles apart, one dreamed ]
[ of having a sister, the other a brother... ]
[ ...to spend all their time with. ]
Hi, Dad.
A new friend?
No, I've had him for years.
Your mother hated him,
so he lived in the tool shed.
There. Let's reconcile them.
There. Not bad, eh?
Dad, if you found a precious relic
from your childhood,
how would it make you feel?
Happy? Sad? Nostalgic? What?
I didn't have this gnome when I was a child.
He was a retirement gift
from my old regiment.
No, I mean something you hid
like a secret treasure.
I should varnish him before autumn.
I'll make some tea. Do you want some?
Breathe in. Hold still.
Better now?
Shut the door.
There's a howling gale.
It's hardly Siberia.
I can see you're not allergic...
...to car fumes.
I almost coughed up my pleura last night.
Coughed up a pleura? Sure.
What's on the menu today, Suzanne?
- Endives au gratin.
They'll have you on your knees, you'll see.
They're good, then?
Depends where.
- If it's at the toilet...
Not good.
12:15, laughs orgasmically
to attract alpha male.
He's going to drive me berserk.
Can't he give up?
There are plenty of other bars.
Goodbye.
Suzanne.
- Yes.
'Au gratin' means white sauce, right?
Yes, why?
I can't stomach it. Like you and horse meat.
It's not my stomach, it's my memory.
I'd rather cook human flesh.
You're kidding.
Suzanne, would you mind
if I left early today?
What's his name?
Dominique Bredoteau.
Hello.
Are you Dominique Bredoteau?
That's me.
Why?
It's about...
...the petition.
Petition?
Yes. The petition to...
...to canonise Lady Di.
No, thanks.
No.
Ladies and gentlemen,
sorry to bother you...
Yes?
- Hello.
I'm looking for Dominique Bredoteau
for the European census.
Come up. Third floor.
Hello, kitten.
Earl Grey?
Jasmine?
What will you have?
I'm working.
There. I'm coming.
Do you know where I can find
Dominique Bredoteau?
Oh, my poor dear.
You just missed him.
Look, there he goes now.
Bre-to-deau.
Not Bre-do-teau.
You need...
...a glass of mulled wine.
Come in.
Come on in.
I've lived here for five years.
This is the first time we've met.
I never go out on the landing.
I'm fussy about who I meet.
They're all creeps anyway.
Come in. Here.
Come in.
They call me the Glass Man,
but my name is Raymond Dufayel.
Amélie Poulain. I'm a waitress at...
- The Two Windmills. I know.
And you've come back empty-handed
from your search for Bretodeau.
Because it's not 'do', it's 'to'.
Like 'Toto'.
- Thank you.
I love that painting.
It's the Luncheon Of The Boating Party.
By Renoir.
I've painted one each year for twenty years.
The hardest part is the looks.
I sometimes feel they deliberately change
their mood as soon as my back's turned.
They look quite happy there.
They should be.
This year they had hare with morels.
And waffles with jam for the children.
Now, what have I done
with that piece of paper?
Ah, you've noticed my video camera
at the window.
It's a gift from my sister-in-law.
I put it there...
...so I don't need to wind up my clocks.
After all these years,
the only person I still can't capture...
...is the girl with the glass of water.
She's in the middle,
yet she's on the outside.
Maybe she's just different from the others.
In what way?
I don't know.
When she was little, she can't
have played much with other children.
Maybe never.
Here.
Dominique Bretodeau, 27 Rue Mouffetard.
It's for you.
[ Every Tuesday morning, ]
[ Dominique Bretodeau
goes to buy a chicken. ]
[ He usually roasts it ]
[ and has it with sauté potatoes. ]
[ After carving the legs, ]
[ the breast and the wings, ]
[ he loves picking the hot carcass ]
[ with his fingers, ]
[ starting with the oysters. ]
[ But not today. Bretodeau
won't buy a chicken. ]
[ He'll go no further... ]
[ ...than this phone booth here. ]
[ In a flash, it all came back to him. ]
[ Federico Bahamontes ]
[ winning the Tour de France in '59. ]
[ Aunt Josette's slips. ]
[ And most of all, that tragic day. ]
[ That tragic day ]
[ when he won all the marbles at break time. ]
Bretodeau.
The pinch, Bretodeau.
Do you understand, Bretodeau?
Cognac, please.
It's amazing, what just happened to me.
It must be my guardian angel.
It's the only explanation.
It was as if the phone booth was calling me.
It rang and rang.
Same here. The microwave's calling me.
I'll have another cognac.
Life's strange.
To a kid, time always drags.
Suddenly you're 50.
All that's left of your childhood...
...fits in a little box,
a little rusty box.
Have you got kids, miss?
I have a daughter.
She must be about your age.
We haven't spoken for years.
I heard she had a child, a boy.
His name is Lucas.
I think it's time I looked them up
before I'm in a box myself.
Don't you think?
[ Amélie suddenly has a strange feeling ]
[ of complete harmony. ]
[ It's a perfect moment. Soft light, ]
[ a scent in the air, the
quiet murmur of the city, ]
[ She breathes deeply. ]
[ Life seems so simple and clear. ]
[ A surge of love, ]
[ an urge to help mankind
suddenly engulfs her. ]
Let me help you. Step down.
Off we go.
We just passed the drum major's widow.
She's worn his coat since the day he died.
Careful.
The horse's head on the butcher's
has lost an ear.
That's the florist laughing.
He has crinkly eyes.
In the bakery window there are lollipops.
Mmm. Smell that.
They're giving out melon slices.
Sugarplum ice cream.
We're passing the pork butcher.
Ham, 79 francs. Spareribs, 45.
Now the cheese shop.
Picodons are 12.90, cabecous 23.50.
At the butcher's a baby's watching a dog
that's watching the chickens roasting.
Now we're at the newspaper kiosk
by the métro.
I'll leave you here. Bye.
'She can't relate to other people.'
'She was always a lonely child.'
[ On a sparkling evening in July, ]
[ while on the beaches holidaymakers... ]
[ ...relax in the new-found sun, ]
[ and in Paris the sweltering crowds... ]
[ ...gaze at the first bursts... ]
[ ...of the traditional fireworks, ]
[ Amélie Poulain, ]
[ godmother of outcasts, ]
[ Madonna of the unloved, ]
[ finally succumbs to exhaustion. ]
[ In Paris' grief-stricken streets, ]
[ a vast throng of mourners... ]
[ ...line her funeral route in silence... ]
[ ...with the measureless sorrow ]
[ of newly orphaned children. ]
[ What a strange destiny for one... ]
[ ...who gave her all, ]
[ yet took such joy in life's simple pleasures. ]
[ Like Don Quixote, she pitted herself... ]
[ ...against the grinding windmill ]
[ of all life's miseries. ]
[ It was a losing battle... ]
[ ...that claimed her life too soon. ]
[ At barely 23, Amélie Poulain... ]
[ ...let her young, tired body merge... ]
[ ...with the ebb and flow of universal woe. ]
[ As she went, she felt a stab of regret ]
[ for letting her father die... ]
[ ...without trying to give his stifled life... ]
[ ...the breath of air she had given... ]
[ ...to so many others. ]
Wait.
Wait...
Wait, wait.
[ Pages full of dud ID photos ]
[ torn up and discarded by their owners, ]
[ carefully reassembled by some oddball. ]
[ Some family album. ]
A pack of Gauloises.
Just a second. It's so smoky in here.
Can you tell me where they are?
I can't see a thing.
- More to the left.
There?
- A bit more. There.
Thank you. You need change.
Forget it.
Yes?
- A mauresque.
A mauresque for the young man.
One kir aligoté, one mauresque,
and two mint sodas.
Was that prenuptial or
post-coital smooching?
Is your bullshit congenital?
Prenuptial.
- Don't worry.
You'll find Mr. Right one day.
All women want to sleep
on a man's shoulder.
All of them.
All men snore after a few drinks,
and I have a musical ear.
I had an operation on my nasal cavities.
I see you're a born romantic.
I see you've never known true love.
I did. It shortened my leg.
I thought you fell off a horse.
- I did.
I was in love with a trapeze artist.
I should have known.
They always drop you at the last minute.
He dropped me just before my act.
It floored me. And the horse.
With me under it.
The mauresque?
Still, true love does exist.
I'm not saying it doesn't.
After 30 years behind this bar,
I'm an expert. I can even
give you the recipe.
Take two regulars.
Let each think the other fancies them.
Leave it to simmer.
It never fails.
Excuse me.
I've had enough.
- I'll go.
Haven't you hurt enough people?
Gina can defend herself.
I don't mean Gina. I mean Georgette.
Georgette?
Open your eyes. She
craves your attention...
...but you only have eyes for Gina.
Poor girl. The things she does...
...to catch your eye.
You really must be blind.
I'm off on a date. Bye.
Goodbye.
Whoever her new one is,
he can't be worse
than that nut with his tape recorder.
Joseph's not so nutty.
He's just in pain.
Come off it, Amélie.
They split up two months ago.
To keep on coming here every day,
he must be a masochist.
Don't say you haven't noticed.
Noticed what?
He always sits here, right?
Yes.
Sit down.
Sit down, Georgette.
What can you see?
- My cigarette counter.
And nothing's missing?
No.
Make an effort.
I don't get it.
I'll leave you to think about it. Good night.
Good morning.
[ Letter Arrives 30 Years Late. ]
[ A mailbag found by climbers... ]
[ ...on a glacier on Mont
Blanc was part of a cargo... ]
[ ...lost in a plane crash in the late 1960s. ]
So sad. A young, pretty princess for once.
Would it be less sad if
she were old and ugly?
Of course. Look at Mother Teresa.
Is he still chasing Gina?
No, he's after somebody else now.
Anyone I know?
- Yes.
Funny about this glacier.
Somebody at The Two Windmills?
Not you, surely.
No.
Not Suzanne.
Surely not.
Yes.
Look. There he is again.
- How strange.
And here.
- Him again.
'Gare de Lyon.'
And here.
'March 5th, Austerlitz.'
Always the same blank expression.
Twelve times.
I counted.
It's very odd.
Why keep taking your picture all over town
only to throw them away?
Good ones, too.
It's like a sort of ritual.
Maybe he's so terrified...
...of growing old, it's his only consolation.
He's dead.
Dead?
Yes. He's scared of being forgotten.
So he uses the photo booths
to remind people what he looks like.
Like faxing his portrait from the afterlife.
A dead man who's scared
of being forgotten.
At least these guys here have made it.
They're long dead,
but they'll never be forgotten.
The girl with the glass...
- Yes.
Maybe she's distracted
because she's thinking about someone.
Somebody in the picture?
No.
More likely a boy she saw somewhere,
and felt an affinity with.
You mean, she'd rather imagine herself
relating to someone who's absent...
...than build relationships
with those around her?
No.
Maybe she tries hard
to fix other people's messy lives.
What about her?
And her own messy life?
Who'll fix that?
It's better to help people
than a garden gnome.
The driver had 2.8g of alcohol in his blood.
Makes me sick.
Talk about employing
irresponsible morons.
Mr. Collignon.
You forgot your keys...
- Hold on, Amélie-mellow. Speed kills.
Model yourself on Lucien.
No radar will ever catch him
while he's working, will it?
You shouldn't do that, Mr. Collignon.
It's not his fault.
True, Mrs. Cauchoix.
It's not his fault he can't
sleep. It's Lady Di's.
Guess what I found in the truck.
A lingerie catalogue.
He'd pasted Lady Di's
face over the model's.
What today? Five asparagus,
or more local history?
Nothing.
[KEYS CUT WHILE YOU WAIT]
Thank you.
The migraine seems to be better.
Yes, but my sciatica
kept me awake all night.
It's ages since I saw you looking so good.
- Really?
A woman without love
withers like a flower without sun.
Strange weather today.
What's so funny?
Everyone who's come in today
has given us a weather report.
We pass the time of day
to forget how time passes.
We do it to keep us from talking crap.
I write crap but nobody wants to publish it.
Another rejection?
- My thirtieth.
Isn't your cousin a book critic?
Forget it. Critics are like leeches...
...sucking the blood of writers.
Is your book a love story?
No, it's about a guy who keeps a journal.
Not about what's happened to him,
but disasters that might
happen in the future.
So he gets depressed and does nothing.
- So basically, it's about a loafer.
Suzanne,
I'll dedicate the manuscript to you.
He's only doing it so you'll write off his tab.
His scribbles for my nibbles.
That's sponsorship.
What took you so long?
Look at the time.
Somebody peed in his mother.
[Foot cream]
[ Without you, today's emotions ]
[ would be the scurf of yesterday's. ]
'Without you,
today's emotions would be the scurf...
...of yesterday's.'
Sorry?
Without you, today's emotions
would be the scurf of yesterday's.
Tickets, please.
How's work?
You've already asked me that.
- Yes. Yes.
You're keeping well?
Pretty much.
I feel a change.
I had two heart attacks
and had to have an abortion...
...because I did crack while I was pregnant.
Other than that, I'm fine.
Good.
Is something wrong?
No, nothing.
Your garden gnome's gone.
Is he back in the tool shed?
Moscow.
There.
No explanation.
Maybe he just wanted to see the world.
I can't understand it.
[LOST... BAG... PHOTOS]
[ Any normal girl ]
[ would call the number straightaway, ]
[ meet him at a café to return the album. ]
[ Then she would know if
her dream was viable. ]
[ It's called a reality check, ]
[ but it's the last thing Amélie wants. ]
I say.
She's not falling in love, is she?
Support us and become VIP member
to remove all ads from www.OpenSubtitles.org